---
title: "Few-Shot Contrastive Adaptation for Audio Abuse Detection in Low-Resource Indic Languages"
collection: publications
category: preprints
permalink: /publication/sankaran2026fewshot
excerpt: 'Abusive speech detection is becoming increasingly important as social media shifts towards voice-based interaction, particularly in multilingual and low-resource settings. This paper investigates whether Contrastive Language-Audio Pre-training (CLAP) can support abusive speech detection directly from audio, bypassing the vulnerabilities of ASR-based pipelines.'
date: 2026-04-11
# venue: #''
slidesurl: #'https://academicpages.github.io/files/slides3.pdf'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.09094'
citation: 'Aditya Narayan Sankaran, Reza Farahbakhsh, and Noel Crespi. 2025. Few-Shot Contrastive Adaptation for Audio Abuse Detection in Low-Resource Indic Languages. Preprint.'
---

Abusive speech detection is becoming increasingly important as social media shifts towards voice-based interaction, particularly in multilingual and low-resource settings. Most current systems rely on automatic speech recognition (ASR) followed by text-based hate speech classification, but this pipeline is vulnerable to transcription errors and discards prosodic information carried in speech. We investigate whether Contrastive Language-Audio Pre-training (CLAP) can support abusive speech detection directly from audio. Using the ADIMA dataset, we evaluate CLAP-based representations under few-shot supervised contrastive adaptation in cross-lingual and leave-one-language-out settings, with zero-shot prompting included as an auxiliary analysis. Our results show that CLAP yields strong cross-lingual audio representations across ten Indic languages, and that lightweight projection-only adaptation achieves competitive performance with respect to fully supervised systems trained on complete training data. However, the benefits of few-shot adaptation are language-dependent and not monotonic with shot size. These findings suggest that contrastive audio-text models provide a promising basis for cross-lingual audio abuse detection in low-resource settings, while also indicating that transfer remains incomplete and language-specific in important ways.